DOC Improve build instructions (#1960)
pyodide/pyodide: docs/development/building-from-sources.md

# Building from sources

```{warning}
If you are building the latest development version of Pyodide from the `main`

> branch, please make sure you are also following build instructions from the dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
branch, please make sure to follow the build instructions from the dev
```

version of the documentation at
[pyodide.org/en/latest/](https://pyodide.org/en/latest/development/building-from-sources.html)
```

Building is easiest with Docker. You can also build on Linux with `make`, while

> builing on Mac is possible, but there are known issues as of 0.18. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
building on Mac is possible, but there are known issues as of 0.18. For
```

> Building is easiest with Docker. You can also build on Linux with `make`, while
> builing on Mac is possible, but there are known issues as of 0.18. For
> Windows, we currently recommend using Docker to build Pyodide. Another option
> for building on Windows is to use
> [WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10) to create a
> Linux build environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on any operating system is easiest using the Pyodide Docker image. This approach works
used with any native operating system as long as Docker is installed. You can also build on your 
native Linux OS if the  correct build prerequisites are installed. Building on MacOS is 
possible, but there are  known issues as of version 0.18 that you will need to work around.
It is not possible to build on Windows, but you can use
[WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10) to create a
Linux build environment.
```

## Build instructions

### Using Docker

We provide a Debian-based Docker image
([`pyodide/pyodide-env`](https://hub.docker.com/r/pyodide/pyodide-env)) on
Docker Hub with the dependencies already installed to make it easier to build
Pyodide. On top of that we provide
a pre-built image
([`pyodide/pyodide`](https://hub.docker.com/r/pyodide/pyodide)) which can be
used for fast custom and partial builds. Note that building from the non

> pre-built the Docker image is _very_ slow on Mac, building on the host machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pre-built Docker image is _very_ slow on Mac, building on the host machine
```

is preferred if at all possible.

1. Install Docker

1. From a git checkout of Pyodide, run `./run_docker` or `./run_docker --pre-built`

1. Run `make` to build.

```{note}
You can control the resources allocated to the build by setting the env
vars `EMSDK_NUM_CORE`, `EMCC_CORES` and `PYODIDE_JOBS` (the default for each is
4).
```

> If running `make` deterministically stops at one point,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If running `make` deterministically stops at some point,
```

> increasing the maximum RAM usage available to the docker container might help
> [This is different from the physical RAM capacity inside the system]. Ideally,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
increasing the maximum RAM usage available to the docker container might help.
(The RAM available to the container is different from the physical RAM capacity of the machine.)
Ideally,
```

at least 3 GB of RAM should be available to the docker container to build

> Pyodide smoothly. These settings can be changed via Docker Preferences (See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pyodide smoothly. These settings can be changed via Docker Preferences (see
```

[here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44533319/how-to-assign-more-memory-to-docker-container)).

> You can edit the files in your source checkout on your host machine, and then

Reviewer: > in your source checkout

Slightly weird wording -- maybe "in the local copy of the source" or something?

Reviewer: I guess the point here is that the source folder is shared between the docker image and the host machine. The docker image doesn't even have vim or any sort of text editor, so for editing the files in there the only options are ed or sed...

Author: Indeed. Tried to improve the wording.

repeatedly run `make` inside the Docker environment to test your changes.

## Using `make`

Make sure the prerequisites for
[emsdk](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk) are installed. Pyodide will
build a custom, patched version of emsdk, so there is no need to build it
yourself prior.

You would need Python 3.9.5 to run the build scripts. To make sure that the
correct Python is used during build it is recommended to use a [Python virtual
environment](https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#creating-a-virtual-environment),

```{tabbed} Linux

Additional build prerequisites are:

- A working native compiler toolchain, enough to build
  [CPython](https://devguide.python.org/setup/#linux).
- CMake
- FreeType 2 development libraries to compile Matplotlib.
- gfortran (GNU Fortran 95 compiler)
- [f2c](http://www.netlib.org/f2c/)
- [ccache](https://ccache.samba.org) (optional) _highly_ recommended for much faster rebuilds.
- (optional) SWIG to compile NLopt

```

```{tabbed} MacOS

> On MacOS, you would need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build on MacOS, you need:
```

- [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) for installing dependencies
- System libraries in the root directory (
  `sudo installer -pkg /Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/Packages/macOS_SDK_headers_for_macOS_10.14.pkg -target /`
  should do it, see https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv/issues/1219#issuecomment-428305417)
- coreutils for md5sum and other essential Unix utilities (`brew install coreutils`).
- cmake (`brew install cmake`)
- pkg-config (`brew install pkg-config`)
- openssl (`brew install openssl`)
- gfortran (`brew cask install gfortran`)
- f2c: Install wget (`brew install wget`), and then run the buildf2c script from
  the root directory (`sudo ./tools/buildf2c`)
- It is also recommended to install the GNU patch (`brew install gpatch`), and
  GNU sed (`brew install gnu-sed`) and re-define them temporarily as patch and

>   sed.

Reviewer: Is there a link to someone explaining how exactly to do this? It seems like someone could need to do some googling to figure out how to apply this advice in practice, might be nice to save them the trouble with a link.

Author: I added a link to https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/gnu-sed which explains how to do it. Though I haven't tried building on MacOS (aside from the CI), so this is mostly speculation, but I think it should fix those recurrent issues with patch/sed.

- (optional) SWIG to compile NLopt (`brew install swig`)

```

```{note}
If you encounter issues with the requirements, it is useful to check the exact
list in the
[Dockerfile](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/blob/main/Dockerfile) which is
tested in the CI.
```

> You can install the python dependencies from the requirement file at the root of Pyodide folder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can install the Python dependencies from the requirement file at the root of Pyodide folder:
```

# Building from sources

```{warning}
If you are building the latest development version of Pyodide from the `main`
branch, please make sure to follow the build instructions from the dev
version of the documentation at
[pyodide.org/en/latest/](https://pyodide.org/en/latest/development/building-from-sources.html)
```

Building on any operating system is easiest using the Pyodide Docker image. This approach works

> used with any native operating system as long as Docker is installed. You can also build on your

Reviewer 2: "works used"? I think removing the used would be best.
```suggestion
with any native operating system as long as Docker is installed. You can also build on your
```
